Added Docs for Firecrest v2 (#49)
eth-cscs/cscs-docs: docs/services/firecrest.md

Additionally, scientific platform developers can integrate FirecREST into [web-enabled portals](https://firecrest-ui-hpc.cscs.ch) and [applications](https://github.com/eth-cscs/firecrest/tree/master/examples/UI-client-credentials), allowing them to securely access authenticated and authorized CSCS services such as job submission and data transfer on HPC systems.

Users can make HTTP requests to perform the following operations:

* basic system utilities like `ls`, `mkdir`, `mv`, `chmod`, `chown`, among others
* actions against the Slurm workload manager (submit, query, and cancel jobs of the user)
* internal (between CSCS systems) and external (to/from CSCS systems) data transfers

## FirecREST versions

Starting early 2025, CSCS has introduced a new version of the API: [FirecREST version 2](https://eth-cscs.github.io/firecrest-v2).

Version 2 is faster, easier to use, and more efficient in resource management than its predecesor, therefore, if you are new to FirecREST start directly using **version 2** (if available for your platform).

> If you're using **version 1**, we recommend you to port your applications to use the new version.

Reviewer: Can you provide a timeline for deprecation of v1 to add here?

Author: Unfortunately, not yet. We need to see how migration from v1 to v2 develops in the next months. I will come back to this in ~3 months.

FirecREST is available for all three major [Alps platforms][ref-alps-platforms], with a different API endpoint and versions for each platform.

<table>
<tr><th>Platform</th><th>Version</th><th>API Endpoint</th><th>Clusters</th></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align: middle;" rowspan="2">HPC Platform</td><td>v1</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/hpc/firecrest/v1</td><td style="vertical-align: middle;" rowspan="2"><a href="../../clusters/daint">Daint</a>, <a href="../../clusters/eiger">Eiger</a></td></tr>
<tr>                                 <td>v2</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/hpc/firecrest/v2</td></tr>
<tr><td>ML Platform</td><td>v1</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/ml/firecrest/v1</td><td style="vertical-align: middle;"><a href="../../clusters/bristen">Bristen</a>, <a href="../../clusters/clariden">Clariden</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align: middle;" rowspan="2">CW Platform</td><td>v1</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/cw/firecrest/v1</td><td style="vertical-align: middle;" rowspan="2"><a href="../../clusters/santis">Santis</a></td></tr>
<tr><td>v2</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/cw/firecrest/v2</td></tr>
</table>

## Accessing FirecREST

### Clients and Access tokens

> A **client application** that makes requests to FirecREST will not be using directly the credentials of the user for the authentication, but an **access token** instead. The access token is a signed JSON Web Token ([JWT](https://jwt.io/introduction)) which contains user information and it's valid for a short time (5 minutes). Behind the API, all commands launched by the client will use the account of the user that registered the client, inheriting their access rights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For authenticating requests to FirecREST, **client applications** use an **access token** instead of directly using the user's credentials.
The access token is a signed JSON Web Token ([JWT](https://jwt.io/introduction)) which contains user information and is only valid for a short time (5 minutes).
Behind the API, all commands launched by the client will use the account of the user that registered the client, inheriting their access rights.
```
Suggested rewording, and one sentence per line (which reduces the number of possible merge conflicts in the future)

> Every client will have a client ID (Consumer Key) and a secret (Consumer Secret) that will be used to get a short-lived access token with an HTTP request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every client has a client ID (Consumer Key) and a secret (Consumer Secret) that are used to get a short-lived access token with an HTTP request.
```

Author: I will do it in the branch and push changes.

!!! example "curl call to fetch the access token"
    ```
    curl -s -X POST https://auth.cscs.ch/auth/realms/firecrest-clients/protocol/openid-connect/token \
         --data "grant_type=client_credentials" \
         --data "client_id=<your_client>" \
         --data "client_secret=<your_secret>"
    ```

You can manage your client application on the [CSCS Developer Portal][ref-devportal].

> [](){#ref-devportal}

Reviewer: To make the links inside the page a little bit "more unique" I would suggest adding and extra `-f7t` between `ref` and  the sub-heading:
`ref-f7t-devportal`

Author: Well, the Developer Portal is not specific to FirecREST. For instance, CI-Ext is using it for external users.

Users can make use of FirecREST to automate access to HPC, enabling [CI/CD pipelines](https://github.com/eth-cscs/firecrest/tree/master/examples/CI-pipeline), [Worflow Managers](https://github.com/eth-cscs/firecrest/tree/master/examples/airflow-operators), and other tools agains HPC resources.

Additionally, scientific platform developers can integrate FirecREST into [web-enabled portals](https://firecrest-ui-hpc.cscs.ch) and [applications](https://github.com/eth-cscs/firecrest/tree/master/examples/UI-client-credentials), allowing them to securely access authenticated and authorized CSCS services such as job submission and data transfer on HPC systems.

Users can make HTTP requests to perform the following operations:

* basic system utilities like `ls`, `mkdir`, `mv`, `chmod`, `chown`, among others
* actions against the Slurm workload manager (submit, query, and cancel jobs of the user)
* internal (between CSCS systems) and external (to/from CSCS systems) data transfers

## FirecREST versions

Starting early 2025, CSCS has introduced a new version of the API: [FirecREST version 2](https://eth-cscs.github.io/firecrest-v2).

> Version 2 is faster, easier to use, and more efficient in resource management than its predecesor, therefore, if you are new to FirecREST start directly using **version 2** (if available for your platform).

Reviewer 2: Maybe also link to the section "FirecREST Deployment on Alps" below?

> Version 2 is faster, easier to use, and more efficient in resource management than its predecesor, therefore, if you are new to FirecREST start directly using **version 2** (if available for your platform).

Author: Yes, that is the section where is documented current deployments

## FirecREST Deployment on Alps

FirecREST is available for all three major [Alps platforms][ref-alps-platforms], with a different API endpoint and versions for each platform.

<table>
<tr><th>Platform</th><th>Version</th><th>API Endpoint</th><th>Clusters</th></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align: middle;" rowspan="2">HPC Platform</td><td>v1</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/hpc/firecrest/v1</td><td style="vertical-align: middle;" rowspan="2"><a href="../../clusters/daint">Daint</a>, <a href="../../clusters/eiger">Eiger</a></td></tr>
<tr>                                 <td>v2</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/hpc/firecrest/v2</td></tr>
<tr><td>ML Platform</td><td>v1</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/ml/firecrest/v1</td><td style="vertical-align: middle;"><a href="../../clusters/bristen">Bristen</a>, <a href="../../clusters/clariden">Clariden</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align: middle;" rowspan="2">CW Platform</td><td>v1</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/cw/firecrest/v1</td><td style="vertical-align: middle;" rowspan="2"><a href="../../clusters/santis">Santis</a></td></tr>
<tr><td>v2</td><td>https://api.cscs.ch/cw/firecrest/v2</td></tr>
</table>

## Accessing FirecREST

> ### Clients and Access tokens

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Clients and access tokens
```

For authenticating requests to FirecREST, **client applications** use an **access token** instead of directly using the user's credentials.
The access token is a signed JSON Web Token ([JWT](https://jwt.io/introduction)) which contains user information and is only valid for a short time (5 minutes).
Behind the API, all commands launched by the client will use the account of the user that registered the client, inheriting their access rights.

Every client will have a client ID (Consumer Key) and a secret (Consumer Secret) that will be used to get a short-lived access token with an HTTP request.

> !!! example "curl call to fetch the access token"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
??? example "`curl` call to fetch the access token"
```
Collapse the example since it has a clear title? This might just be personal preference though... Otherwise make it a tip?

    ```
    curl -s -X POST https://auth.cscs.ch/auth/realms/firecrest-clients/protocol/openid-connect/token \
         --data "grant_type=client_credentials" \
         --data "client_id=<your_client>" \
         --data "client_secret=<your_secret>"
    ```

You can manage your client application on the [CSCS Developer Portal][ref-devportal].

[](){#ref-devportal}
### CSCS Developer Portal

> The [Developer Portal](https://developer.cscs.ch) facilitates CSCS Users to manage subscriptions to an API at CSCS (such as FirecREST v1/v2).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Developer Portal](https://developer.cscs.ch) facilitates CSCS users to manage subscriptions to an API at CSCS (such as FirecREST v1/v2).
```

One way to get started is by using [pyFirecREST](https://pyfirecrest.readthedocs.io/), a Python package with a collection of wrappers for the different functionalities of FirecREST.
This package simplifies the usage of FirecREST by making multiple requests in the background for more complex workflows as well as by refreshing the access token before it expires.

> #### Try version 2

Reviewer: Instead of having these as sub-headings, you can use "tabs" (just a suggestion)

https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/content-tabs/

You removed the a tab above, so maybe you are not a fan of how they look or work.

There are a few spots in these docs where you might want to use tabs for version1 and version 2, for consistency.
You could make version 2 the first tab, so it is what is displayed by default.

Author: > Instead of having these as sub-headings, you can use "tabs" (just a suggestion)
I like the idea.

> You removed the a tab above, so maybe you are not a fan of how they look or work.
I removed it because the option of migrate a client is not longer supported, thus there's just one option.

One way to get started is by using [pyFirecREST](https://pyfirecrest.readthedocs.io/), a Python package with a collection of wrappers for the different functionalities of FirecREST.
This package simplifies the usage of FirecREST by making multiple requests in the background for more complex workflows as well as by refreshing the access token before it expires.

#### Try version 2

> !!! example "Try FirecREST using pyFirecREST v2"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
??? example "Try FirecREST using pyFirecREST v2"
```
This example is very long, maybe worth collapsing?

    #         "dataType": "scratch",
    #         "defaultWorkDir": true
    #       },
    #       {
    #         "path": "/users",
    #         "dataType": "users",
    #         "defaultWorkDir": false
    #       },
    #       {
    #         "path": "/capstor/store/cscs",
    #         "dataType": "store",
    #         "defaultWorkDir": false
    #       }
    #     ]    
    #   }
    # ]

    # List content of directories
    print(json.dumps(client.list_files("daint", "/capstor/scratch/cscs/<username>"),
                                       indent=2))
    
    # [
    #   {
    #     "name": "directory",
    #     "type": "d",
    #     "linkTarget": null,
    #     "user": "<username>",
    #     "group": "<project>",
    #     "permissions": "rwxr-x---+",
    #     "lastModified": "2024-09-02T12:34:45",
    #     "size": "4096"
    #   },
    #   {
    #     "name": "file.txt",
    #     "type": "-",
    #     "linkTarget": null,
    #     "user": "<username>",
    #     "group": "<project>",
    #     "permissions": "rw-r-----+",
    #     "lastModified": "2024-09-02T08:26:04",
    #     "size": "131225"
    #   }
    # ]
    ```

#### Try version 1

> !!! example "Try FirecREST using pyFirecREST v1"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
??? example "Try FirecREST using pyFirecREST v1"
```
This example is quite long. Worth collapsing?

    print(json.dumps(client.all_systems(), indent=2))
    # Output: (one dictionary per system)
    # [{
    #      'description': 'System ready',
    #      'status': 'available',
    #      'system': 'daint'      
    # }]

    print(json.dumps(client.list_files('daint', '/capstor/scratch/cscs/<username>'),
                                       indent=2))
    # Example output: (one dictionary per file)
    # [
    #   {
    #       'name': 'directory',
    #       'user': '<username>'
    #       'last_modified': '2024-04-20T11:22:41',
    #       'permissions': 'rwxr-xr-x',
    #       'size': '4096',
    #       'type': 'd',
    #       'group': '<project>',
    #       'link_target': '',
    #   }
    #   {
    #      'name': 'file.txt',
    #      'user': '<username>'
    #      'last_modified': '2024-09-02T08:26:04',
    #      'permissions': 'rw-r--r--',
    #      'size': '131225',
    #      'type': '-',
    #      'group': '<project>',
    #      'link_target': '',
    #   }
    # ]
    ```

The tutorial is written for a generic instance of FirecREST but if you have a valid user at CSCS you can test it directly with your resource allocation on the exposed systems.

> ### Data Transfer with FirecREST

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Data transfer with FirecREST
```
